How to archive data - developer guide (#94)
temporalio/documentation: docs/archive-data.md

1. **Compliance**: For legal reasons, data may need to be stored for a long period of time.
2. **Debugging**: Older data may help with debugging.

:::note

Archival is not supported when running Temporal via docker-compose.

Archival is disabled by default when installing the system manually and when deploying via [helm charts](https://github.com/temporalio/helm-charts/blob/master/templates/server-configmap.yaml#L176), but can be enabled in the [config](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/config/development.yaml).

Archival only supports Event Histories. You may notice some boilerplate infrastructure to support archiving visibility records. Visibility archival is not yet supported and visibility records are deleted after the Workflow retention period.

:::

## Setup

Archival consists of four elements.

1. **Configuration**: Archival is controlled by the [server configuration](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/config/development.yaml#L81) (i.e. the `config/development.yaml` file).
2. **Provider**: Location where the data should be archived. Supported providers are S3, GCloud, and the local file system.

> 3. **Archiver**: System component which archives and retrieves data. Each archiver supports a specific provider. 

Reviewer: Why is "archiver" lower case?

Author: So, I have been capitalizing "Archival" but not the individual elements.
Ironically "Archival" is abstract. There is no real "Archival" feature - there are several individual elements that together make archiving work... which we are calling "Archival".
We might need to revisit that - but for now, archiver, provider, and configuration are lowercase.

4. **URI**: Specifies which provider and archiver should be used. The system uses the URI schema and path to make the determination.

To setup Archival, you will need to take the following steps.

1. Setup the provider of your choice. 
2. Configure Archival.

> 3. Create a Namespace that uses a valid URI and has Archival enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create a Namespace with a valid URI and has Archival enabled.
```

### Providers

Temporal supports several providers out of the box.

- **Local file system**: The [filestore archiver](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/tree/master/common/archiver/filestore) is used to archive data in the file system of whatever host the Temporal server is running on. This provider is used mainly for local installations and testing and should not be relied on for production environments.
- **Google Cloud**: The [gcloud archiver](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/tree/master/common/archiver/gcloud) is used to connect and archive data with [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/storage).
- **S3**: The [s3store archiver](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/tree/master/common/archiver/s3store) is used to connect and archive data with [S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3). 
- **Custom**: If you want to use a provider that is not currently supported, you can [create your own archiver](#custom-archiver) to support it.

> When you choose a provider, make sure to save the exact storage location's URI, as it is passed as a parameter when you [create a Namespace](#namespace-creation).

Reviewer: I feel the wording could be slightly better here.

Author: 🤷

### Configuration

Archival configuration is defined in the [`config/development.yaml`](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/config/development.yaml#L81) file.

> In the following example configuration we see that:

Reviewer: I think it would be cool if you inlined the lines you are referring to in this list. Right now I have to manually match it myself.

1. Archival is enabled at the cluster level.

> 2. Namespaces can use either the local filestore provider or the Google Cloud provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Namespaces can either use the local filestore provider or the Google Cloud provider.
```

Author: either comes AFTER the verb ... so no 😉

      state: "disabled"
```

> The following table contains acceptable values for each configuration and what they do. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table showcases acceptable values for each configuration and what purpose they serve.
```

| Config | Acceptable values | Description |
|--------|-------------------|-------------|

> | `archival.history.state`                       | `enabled`, `disabled`  | This must be set to `enabled` to use the Archival feature with any Namespace in the cluster. |

Reviewer: I think these could be less verbose

"This must be set to `enabled` to use the Archival feature with any Namespace in the cluster."

Could be:

"Must be `enabled` to use the Archival feature with any Namespace."

Reviewer: Same is true for other Descriptions.

| `archival.history.enableRead`                  | `true`, `false`        | This must be set to `true` to read from the archived Event History. |
| `archival.history.provider`                    | Sub provider configs are `filestore`, `gstorage`, `s3`, or `your_custom_provider`. |  The default config specifies `filestore`. |
| `archival.history.provider.filestore.fileMode` | File permission string | This specifies the file permissions of the archived files. We recommend using the default value of `"0666"` to avoid read/write issues. |
| `archival.history.provider.filestore.dirMode`  | File permission string | This specifies the directory permissions of the archive directory. we recommend using the default value of `"0766"` to avoid read/write issues. |
| `namespaceDefaults.archival.history.state`     | `enabled`, `disabled`  | This sets the default state of the Archival feature whenever a new Namespace is created without specifying the Archival state. |
| `namespaceDefaults.archival.history.URI`       | Valid URI              | The value must be a URI of the file store location and match a schema that correlates to a provider. |

### Namespace creation

> While Archival is configured at the cluster level, it operates independently within each Namespace. When a Namespace is created, if an Archival URI is not specified then the Namespace will use the value of `defaultNamespace.archival.history.URI` from the `config/development.yaml` file. The Archival URI can not be changed once the Namespace is created. Each Namespace supports a single Archival URI, but each Namespace can use a different URI (archiver). A Namespace can safely switch Archival between `enabled` and `disabled` states as long as Archival is enabled at the cluster level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Archival is configured at the cluster level, it operates independently within each Namespace. If an Archival URI is not specified when a Namespace is created, the Namespace will then use the value of `defaultNamespace.archival.history.URI` from the `config/development.yaml` file. The Archival URI can not be changed once the Namespace is created. Each Namespace supports a single Archival URI, but each Namespace can use a different URI (archiver). A Namespace can safely switch Archival between `enabled` and `disabled` states as long as Archival is enabled at the cluster level.
```

This part doesn't make any sense to me: " Each Namespace supports a single Archival URI, but each Namespace can use a different URI (archiver)."

Author: 🤔

Archival is supported in global Namespaces (Namespaces spanning multiple clusters). When Archival is running in a global Namepsace, it will first run on the active cluster and then some time later it will run on the standby cluster. Before archiving, a history check is done to see what has been previously archived.

### Test setup

To test Archival locally, start by running a Temporal server:

```bash

> ./temporal-server start

Reviewer: We should reconsider including this here as we have to maintain it and most people use docker

Author: docker-compose doesn't support Archival at present - so this would be the only way to test (though whether this would actually work is unknown - but it was pulled from existing docs).

```

Then register a new Namespace with Archival enabled. 

```bash
./tctl --ns samples-namespace namespace register --gd false --history_archival_status enabled --retention 0
```

Next, run a sample workflow such as the [helloworld temporal sample](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal-go-samples/tree/master/helloworld).

> Once execution has finished Archival should occur.

Reviewer: "should" is a terrifying word to read in docs

> ### Read archives

Reviewer: It's weird title. It's the correct style but 'read archives' actually means something so its confusing

You can retrieve archived Event Histories by copying the `workflowId` and `runId` of the completed Workflow from the log output and running:

```bash
./temporal --ns samples-namespace wf show --wid <workflowId> --rid <runId>
```

## Custom archiver

> To archive data with a specific provider, Temporal must have a corresponding archiver component installed. The system does not intend to limit you to the existing providers, so to use a provider that is not currently supported you may create your own archiver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To archive data with a given provider, Temporal must have a corresponding archiver component installed. The system does not intend to limit you to the existing providers, so to use a provider that is not currently supported you may create your own archiver.
```
